Jioji Konrote

Jioji Konousi "George" Konrote, OF, MC (born 26 December 1947) is a Fijian politician and retired Major-General of the Fiji Military who has been President of Fiji since 2015. After commanding a peacekeeping mission in Lebanon, Konrote served as Fiji's High Commissioner to Australia from 2001 to 2006, as Minister of State for Immigration briefly in 2006, and as Minister for Employment Opportunities, Productivity and Industrial Relations from 2014 to 2015. He is the first non-iTaukei president and the first Seventh-day Adventist to be elected by parliament, as previous presidents were selected by the Great Council of Chiefs. ==Early life and military career== Konrote is a native of the island of Rotuma. His days as a pupil at Natabua High School in Lautoka, Fiji, are described in the prize-winning book on Fiji Kava in the Blood by Peter Thomson. A career soldier, Konrote enlisted into the RFMF in 1966 and trained with New Zealand and Australian defence forces, studying at institutions such as the Australian College of Defence and Strategic Studies and the Australian Defence Force Academy in Canberra, Australia, (where he became a Fellow in 1996), and the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University in 2000. Rising through the ranks of the Fiji Military, he commanded battalions of Fijian soldiers in their peacekeeping efforts in Lebanon during the Fiji's UNIFIL campaign, and was subsequently appointed Deputy Force Commander of the UNIFIL operation, and finally the United Nations Assistant Secretary-General and Force Commander in Lebanon. In recognition of his contributions in these fields, Konrote was awarded the UNIFIL Peace Medal (1978), the Military Cross (UK, 1982), the Order of Merit (Italy, 1997), the Order of the Cedar (Lebanon, 1999) and was made an Officer of the Order of Fiji (Military Division) in 1997. ==Diplomatic and political career== From 2001 to 2006, Konrote served as Fiji's High Commissioner to Australia.(9 June 2005). Fiji envoy attends minister's funeral in Australia , BBC Monitoring International Reports (from Fijilive web site, Suva) ("Fiji's high commissioner to Australia, Maj-Gen George Konrote ....") After his appointment, equivalent to that of an ambassador, expired at the end of March 2006, he was elected to represent the Rotuman Communal Constituency in the 2006 election, and he was subsequently appointed as Minister of State for Immigration and Ex-Servicemen in the Cabinet of Laisenia Qarase. His role in this portfolio abruptly ended when the government was deposed in a military coup led by Commodore Frank Bainimarama on 5 December 2006. Despite serving in the Qarase government, Konrote became a candidate for Bainimarama's party, FijiFirst, in the 2014 election, winning 1,585 votes. He was subsequently appointed as Minister for Employment Opportunities, Productivity and Industrial Relations in September 2014. On 12 October 2015, Konrote resigned from Parliament after being elected as President of Fiji. He was sworn in on 12 November 2015. Prince Harry and Meghan Markle ate at the State dinner at the GPH with Parliament Speaker Dr. Jiko Luveni, President Jioji Konrote and First Lady Sarote, on 23 October 2018 == References == Category:1947 births Category:Fijian soldiers Category:United Nations military personnel Category:FijiFirst politicians Category:Government ministers of Fiji Category:John F. Kennedy School of Government alumni Category:High Commissioners of Fiji to Australia Category:Living people Category:Officers of the Order of Fiji Category:Politicians from Lautoka Category:Presidents of Fiji Category:Recipients of the Military Cross Category:Recipients of the National Order of the Cedar Category:Rotuman members of the House of Representatives (Fiji) Category:Rotuman members of the Parliament of Fiji Category:Rotuman people Category:Fijian Seventh-day Adventists Category:Fijian officials of the United Nations 