Wolfgang Doeblin

Wolfgang Doeblin, known in France as Vincent Doblin (17 March 1915 – 21 June 1940), was a French-German mathematician. == Life == A native of Berlin, Wolfgang was the son of the Jewish-German novelist and physician, Alfred Döblin, and Erna Reiss. His family escaped from Nazi Germany to France where he became a French citizen. Studying probability theory at the Université de Paris under Fréchet, he quickly made a name for himself as a gifted theorist. He received his doctorate at age 23. Drafted in November 1938, after refusing to be exempted from military service, he was a soldier in the French army when World War II broke out in 1939, and was quartered at Givet, in the Ardennes, as a telephone operator. There, he wrote down his latest work on the Chapman–Kolmogorov equation, and sent this as a "pli cacheté" (sealed envelope) to the French Academy of Sciences. His company, sent to the sector of the Saare on the ligne Maginot in April 1940, was caught in the German attack in the Ardennes in May, withdrew to the Vosges, and capitulated on 22 June 1940. On 21 June, Doeblin shot himself in Housseras (a small village near Epinal), when German troops came within sight. In his last moments, he burned his mathematical notes. The sealed envelope was opened in 2000,Wolfgang Doeblin "Sur l'équation de Kolmogoroff", Comptes Rendus de l'Academie des Sciences, 331 (2000). revealing that Doeblin had obtained major results on the Chapman-Kolmogorov equation and the theory of diffusion processes.Bru, B. and Yor, M. (2000) Comments on the life and mathematical legacy of Wolfgang Doeblin, Finance and Stochastics, Volume 6, 3–47. His life was the subject of a 2007 movie by Agnes Handwerk and Harrie Willems, A Mathematician Rediscovered.Wolfgang Doeblin — Histoire des mathématiques Journals, Books & Online Media | Springer When he became a French citizen in 1938, he chose the official name of Vincent Doblin. However, he later chose to sign his papers as Wolfgang Doeblin and it is under this name that all his mathematical papers and professional letters were published. Mazliak, L.: On the exchanges between W. Doeblin and B. Hostinský Rev. Hist. Math. 13, no. 1 (2007) == Notes == == References == * * * * Bernard Bru, Marc Yor: La vie de W. Doeblin, Lettre de l'Académie des sciences, no. 2, 2001 * Marc Petit: Die verlorene Gleichung. Auf der Suche nach Wolfgang und Alfred Döblin ("L'équation de Kolmogoroff"). Eichborn, Frankfurt/M. 2005, * Ellinghaus, Jürgen / Ferry, Hubert: La lettre scellée du soldat Doblin / Der versiegelte Brief des Soldaten Döblin, TV documentary, 2006, ARTE/RBB . VoD (French or German version): . * Ellinghaus, Jürgen / Gardini, Aldo: Die Irrfahrt des Soldaten Döblin, audiobook, ed. Stiftung Radio Basel, Christoph Merian Verlag, Basel, 2007. == External links == * Wolfgang Doeblin: a mathematician rediscovered Category:1915 births Category:1940 deaths Category:20th-century French mathematicians Category:French military personnel who committed suicide Category:20th-century German mathematicians Category:Jewish emigrants from Nazi Germany to France Category:Members of the French Academy of Sciences Category:Mathematicians who committed suicide Category:Writers from Berlin Category:People of the German Empire Category:People of the Weimar Republic Category:Probability theorists Category:French Army personnel Category:French military personnel of World War II Category:French military personnel killed in World War II 