Divine Truth

Divine Truth is a new religious movement based in Queensland, Australia. It was started in 2007 by spiritual teacher Alan John Miller, also known as A.J., who claims to be the returned Jesus of Nazareth. In a seven-minute interview which aired on A Current Affair, Miller claimed that Divine Truth is God's truth and is the "absolute truth of the universe". The teachings of the Divine Truth movement focus primarily on how a person can evolve their soul in love and develop a personal relationship with God, like Jesus did in the first century. This process includes prayer (longing for God’s Divine Love), following one’s loving desires and passions, taking personal responsibility for one’s own emotions, as well as ”Emotional Clearing" or "Emotional Processing” to clear the soul of emotional errors. Miller used to be an elder in the Jehovah's Witnesses and used to be a computer systems engineer. In 2007, Miller purchased a 16-hectare property at Wilkesdale, Queensland, Australia. In 2009, Divine Truth listeners purchased another 240ha property, with plans to build "learning centres" and a visiting centre for international visitors. Hundreds of people bought dozens of properties that are located close to Miller near Kingaroy. ==Leadership== When questioned about whether he could speak Aramaic, the language spoken by Jesus, he said, "It can be spoken. Not now I can't." His partner, Mary Suzanne Luck, claims to know she is Mary Magdalene. On the British magazine-programme This Morning on 15 July 2015, Miller claimed that in the 1st century as Jesus he was in a state of "at-one- ment" with God and thus God could perform miracles through him; in his present "incarnation", he is not yet at that stage of development and thus cannot perform miracles. He only became at one with God at the age of 31 in the first century. In his present (2015) "incarnation" he only started accepting he was Jesus at the age of 40 (although he said he has had memories of being Jesus since he was 2).Man Claims to be Jesus on This Morning - This Morning - 15 July 2015 - available on YouTube When asked by Eamonn Holmes what his message to the world is, Miller responded that there are two forms of love: the love that flows from the individual to another (natural love) and then there is God's Love (Divine Love). God's love can enter a person and has the power to transform a person. Miller stated that he encourages people to engage this process by asking God for His love and then to notice the changes that will occur once a person receives this love and their ability to share this love with others. Miller claims he communicates with God not through words but that God communicates through Her Love and this is how he also discovers God's Truth, a process open to all people, all God's children. ==Earth changes prediction== AJ Miller has stated that what others claim are predictions are just his personal opinions and feelings at that point in time and not to be taken as definite predictions. One of these opinions was that "100-foot tidal waves" would turn Kingaroy into beachfront property. His feeling at the time was that global Earth changes would occur between 2011 and 2013, and that billions of people would die. Miller describes some of these events as similar to events in the movie 2012. Miller stated in 2011: "There's the movie 2012 right? Everyone I suggest you see it, everyone. A lot of the events portrayed in the movie are kind of similar to the events that will be occurring. Miller has also stated similar feelings such as that a 100m tsunami might hit Australia, that a new continent would rise up next to Hawaii, that devastating earthquakes will occur, that some countries will disappear completely while other countries will change completely. ==Accusations of cultism== The Cult Awareness and Information Centre had previously said of Divine Truth: "The moment someone becomes God or God's voice on Earth it gives them another level of authority to enforce submission to them." Miller states: "All we do is present seminars and answer people's questions. I still for the life of me can't quite understand where the cult thing has come from. There were lots of people in the first century who didn't believe I was the Messiah and were offended by what I said - and in fact I died at the hands of some of them."'AJ Miller: I am Australian Jesus, Follow me' - International Business Times - 29 May 2013 ==See also== * List of messiah claimants * Messiah complex == References == ==External links== * Official website Category:Christian new religious movements Category:Religion in Australia Category:Self-declared messiahs Category:Reincarnation Category:Apocalypticism 