Shako

French Naval Fusilier's shako dating from c. 1830 A shako (, , or ) is a tall, cylindrical military cap, usually with a visor, and sometimes tapered at the top. It is usually adorned with some kind of ornamental plate or badge on the front, metallic or otherwise, and often has a feather, plume (see hackle), or pompom attached at the top. ==Origins== The word shako originated from the Hungarian name for the peak, which Hungarian border soldiers (Grenz Infanterie) added around 1790 to their previously visorless stovepipe-style hats. Originally these hats were part of the clothing commonly worn by sheperds, before being added to the uniform of the Hungarian hussar in the early 18th century.Alex. R. Cattley, The British infantry shako, in: Journal of the Society for Army Historical Research, Vol. 15, No. 60 (Winter, 1936), pp. 188-208 (p. 188) Other spellings include chako, czako, schako and tschako. From 1800 on, the shako became a common military headdress, worn by the majority of regiments in the armies of Europe and the Americas. Replacing in most instances the light bicorne, the shako was initially considered an improvement. Made of heavy felt and leather, it retained its shape and provided some protection for the soldier's skull, while its visor shaded his eyes.John R. Elting, page 445 "Swords Around A Throne - Napoleon's Grande Armee", The shako retained this pre-eminence until the mid-19th century, when spiked helmets began to appear in the army of Prussia, which influenced armies of the various German states, and the more practical kepi replaced it for all but parade wear in the French Army. The Imperial Russian Army substituted a spiked helmet for the shako in 1844–45 but returned to the latter headdress in 1855, before adopting a form of kepi in 1864.Boris Mollo, Uniforms of the Imperial Russian Army, Following the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, military fashions changed and cloth or leather helmets based on the German headdress began to supersede the shako in many armies. Although the mid-19th century shako was impressive in appearance and added to the height of the wearer, it was also heavy and by itself provided little protection against bad weather as most models were made of cloth or felt material over a leather body and peak. Many armies countered this by utilising specially designed oilskin covers to protect the shako and the wearer from heavy rain while on campaign. The shako provided little protection from enemy action as the most it could offer was in giving partial shielding of the skull from enemy cavalry sabres. George Anthony Legh Keck During the period of general peace that followed the Napoleonic Wars, the shako in European armies became a showy and impractical headdress that was best suited for the parade ground. As an example, the "Regency" officers' shako of the British Army of 1822 was in height and across at the crown, with ornamental gold cords and lace. Lieutenant Colonel George Anthony Legh Keck can be seen in a portrait from 1851 wearing a 'broad-topped' shako that was topped by a white plume and held in place by bronze chin scales.Morgan-Jones, G. (2008) "The Prince Albert's Own Yeomanry - Leicester Yeomanry" http://www.paoyeomanry.co.uk/LY3.htm The "Regency" shako was followed in the British Army by a succession of models —"Bell-topped", "Albert", "French" and "Quilted" — until the adoption of the Home Service helmet, in 1877. ==Variations== Reenactment of British infantry of 1815, with line infantry wearing the Belgic shako, followed by light infantry wearing the earlier "stovepipe" style The "stovepipe" shako was a tall, cylindrical type with a brass badge attached to the front. The stovepipe was used by the infantry of the British Army from around 1799, and its use was continued until the end of the Peninsular War. From then on it was used only by the light infantry. In the US Army, a lower felt shako superseded the top hat style, bearskin crest surmounted "Round hat" in 1810.David Cole: Survey of U.S. Army. Uniforms, weapons and accoutrements, 2007, p. 5 The "Belgic" shako was a black felt shako with a raised front introduced in the Portuguese Marines in 1797 and then in the Portuguese Army in 1806, as the . It was later adopted by the British Army, officially replacing the stovepipe shako in 1812, but was not introduced completely until 1815 and became therefore known as the "Waterloo" shako. This cumbersome headgear was already discarded in 1816, in favour of the slightly bell topped "Regency" shako.Cattley p. 193 The Belgic shako was decorated with silver or gold lace for officers, according to regimental practice.Colonel Robert H. Rankin, page 21 "Military Headdress - a pictorial history of military headgear from 1660 to 1914", René Chartrand, page 45 "The Portuguese Army of the Napoleonic Wars (3)", In 1813 the US Army adopted a similar entirely leather made model,Edgar M. Howell, Donald E. Kloster: United States Army Headgear to 1854. Catalog of United States Army Uniforms in the Collections of the Smithsonian Institution, Vol.1, 1969, p. 15 ff. nicknamend by the soldiers as"Tombstone" cap, because of the extension of the top front that reminded on a grave marker.Cole p. 6 The kiwa (also kiver) was a style of shako introduced into the Imperial Russian Army in 1812; its distinguishing feature was the dished or concave top.Haythornthwaite, Philip (1987) The Russian Army of the Napoleonic Wars (1): Infantry 1799-1814 Osprey Publishing, (p. 23) This style of shako was worn by the Black Brunswickers alongside shakos of the Austrian pattern.Von Pivka, Otto (1985), Brunswick Troops, 1809-15, Osprey Publishing, (p. 47) The bell-top shako was a large and elaborate type which became popular in the 1820s and 1830s when there was little warfare between the major European powers and practicality on the battlefield became less important than appearance on the parade ground. It featured a crown that clearly flared outwards towards the top, giving a distinctive bell shape, and was often adorned with decorative cords and plumes. British troops were accoutered with the bell-top shako from 1829 to 1844.Kannik, Prebben (1968), Military Uniforms in Colour, Blandford Press, (p.206) US troops followed that example by adopting the "Yeoman" crown cap in 1813 for Artillery and rifle regiments, followed by the bell crown cap (with concave sides) from 1821.Howell, Kloster p. 19The US shakos changed again from 1832 to 1851, when a leather made "cap" for infantry and artillery was introduced, resembling the former "Yeoman" crown cap. Howell, Kloster p. 26Dragoons were issued with a cap model, whose crown was smaller than the cap's base. Howell, Kloster p. 31 All those models were dropped in between 1851 and 1854, in favour of a cloth made shako of smaller size and swung shape, similar to the British "Albert" shako.Howell, Kloster p. 59 The Albert shako was a British design introduced in 1844, which was intended to be more practical than previous models. It featured a lower crown that tapered inwards at the top, and a second peak at the back intended to protect the wearer's neck from the sun. It is named after Prince Albert who supposedly designed it. It was not popular, and during the Crimean War a round "undress cap" was often worn instead. It was eventually replaced by smaller, lighter versions.Kannik p. 212 In the British Army it was the so called French pattern shako (1855-1861)Cattley p. 200, the Quilted shako (1861-1869)Cattley p. 202 and a last shako model (1869-1878), as lower and more ornamented version intended to be worn on parades only. The last two shako models were made of dark blue cloth mounted on a cork basis.Cattley p. 200, p. 204f. The shako was finally superseded for most British regiments by the home service helmet in 1878.Kannik p. 232 In the US Army, the last shako model of 1872 (a cut-down version of the 1851-1854 pattern) was replaced by the spiked helmet in 1882. Edgar M. Howell: United States Army Headgear 1855-1902. Catalog of United States Army Uniforms in the Collections of the Smithsonian Institution, Vol.2, 1975, p. 35 p. 62 Cavalry and artillery had adopted the helmet already in 1872.Howell p. 41 For undress or campaign dress, forage capsHowell, Kloster p. 22 and felt hatsHowell p. 1 had replaced the shako style cap since 1825 respectively 1855. The Bengal Native Infantry of the British East India Company's army worn a version of the bell-top shako as described above, although lacking a vizor or peak. Frequently portrayed in contemporary illustrations as being worn by mutinous sepoys during the Great Indian Rebellion of 1857, this headdress was actually replaced by the Kilmarnock cap ten years before.W.Y. Carman, page 100 "Indian Army Uniforms: Infantry", Morgan-Grampian: London 1969 ==Final period of extensive wear== In 1914, the shako was still being worn in France (by chasseurs à cheval, infantry of the Republican Guard, chasseurs d'Afrique and hussars); in Imperial Germany (Jägers, Landwehr and marines); in Austro-Hungary (full dress of non-Muslim line infantry James Lucas, page 162 "Fighting Troops of the Austro-Hungarian Army 1868-1914, and hussars in both full and field dress); in Russia (full dress of generals, staff officers, and infantry, engineers and artillery of the Imperial Guard). In Belgium the shako was official field dress for line infantry, chasseurs à pied, engineers, transport/ambulance, administration, fortress artillery, and mounted chasseurs, although after the outbreak of war it was usually discarded in favour of the "undress" cap. In Denmark it remained part of the full dress of Guard Hussars; in Mexico (full dress of federal troops of all branches); in Portugal (military cadets); in Romania (full dress of artillery); in Italy (horse artillery and military academies); and in Spain (line infantry, cazadores, engineers, and artillery). The Highland Light Infantry and Scottish Rifles of the British Army retained small shakos for full dress and the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica states that there were plans to reintroduce the shako as parade dress for all English, Irish and Welsh line infantry regiments - a project that was interrupted by the outbreak of World War I. The Swiss and Dutch armies wore shakos, even for field wear, until after 1916. The Japanese Army had worn the shako as a parade headdress until 1905, although a form of high-sided kepi had been the normal wear. During this final period of elaborate and colourful traditional uniforms, the shako varied widely from army to army in height, colour, trim and profile. Amongst the most distinctive of these were the high Napoleonic shako (kiver) worn by the Russian Imperial Guard and the low streamlined model (ros) of the Spanish Army. The Swiss version had black-leather peaks at both front and rear - a feature that also appeared in the shako-like headdress that was worn by British postmen between 1896 and 1910, and New Zealand policemen of the same period. Most German police forces adopted a version of the Jäger shako, after World War I, which replaced the spiked leather helmet (Pickelhaube) that had become identified with the previous Imperial regime. This new headdress survived several political changes and was worn by the civilian police forces of the Weimar Republic, Nazi Germany, East Germany, and West Germany. It finally disappeared in the 1970s, when the various police forces of West Germany adopted a standardised green and light fawn uniform that included the high-fronted peaked cap that is still worn. ==Modern use== French Republican Guard at the Bastille Day Military Parade Mounted Grenadier, guarding the Casa Rosada In Europe, the infantry of the French Republican Guard, cadets at Saint-Cyr, cadets at the Belgian Royal Military Academy, cadets at the Portuguese Colégio Militar and Pupilos do Exército military schools, the Italian Horse Guards Corps, Horse Artillery and cadets at the Military Academy of Modena, the Danish Guard Hussar Regiment, and the Spanish Royal Guard and 1st King's Immemorial Infantry Regiment all have shakos as part of their respective ceremonial uniforms. Various Latin American armies, including those of Venezuela, Mexico, Brazil, Peru, Ecuador, Uruguay and Argentina, retain shakos for ceremonial guard or military academy uniforms. In Russia, the historic kiver has been reintroduced for wear by the Kremlin Guards for ceremonial occasions. In India the Madras Sappers & Miners of the Madras Engineer Group wear dark-blue visorless shakos as part of their ceremonial uniform. An Indonesian ceremonial unit as well as the cadet corps of the military academies of the Philippines and South Korea also use shakos. In the United States, shakos are still worn as full-dress headgear by cadets of West Point (where it is known colloquially as a tarbucket), Virginia Military Institute, The Citadel, Marion Military Institute, New York Military Academy, and Valley Forge Military Academy and College (in a modified form) with their Full Dress Grey uniforms. Many college and high-school marching bands feature shakos as part of their dress uniform. In the Canadian Forces, Les Voltigeurs de Québec are authorized to wear dark green shakos with full-dress uniforms. == Non-military use == In the US and the Philippines, shakos are frequently worn by civilian marching bands and drum corps. In the latter country, the cadets of some civilian institutions such as the Philippine National Police Academy, and some colleges and high schools, also use the shako, although peaked "service cap" styles have become more popular in recent years. Those shako styles still in use in marching bands are generally quite tall and have elaborate plumes. For example, at the University of Notre Dame in South Bend, Indiana, the kilted Irish Guard wear tall black fur shakos with bright yellow plumes, bringing their total height in uniform to almost tall. These shakos are typical of marching band drum majors, however the Irish Guard shako is unique in its size, color, and design. In drum corps and corps-style marching bands, the chin strap is rarely worn under the chin; instead, it is worn just under the lower lip, in the style of cadets at West Point. In Canada the shako is worn by volunteers in various historical forts wearing 19th-century period uniforms. ==Images== File:Shako-garde-royale-p1000581.jpg|Shako of the French Royal Guard as worn from 1816 to 1830; Morges Castle, Switzerland File:GardeTschako.jpg|Shako of the Garde-Jäger Battalion, a Prussian guard unit based at Potsdam, circa 1914 File:SSMI flag guard Bastille Day 2008.jpeg|Colour party of the Minister of the Interior Security Service on Bastille Day File:Paspampres3.png|Indonesian Presidential Security Force honor guard wearing a Shako while presenting arms File:SR01 032.jpg|West Point Cadets wearing "Spring Parade Dress" File:Vca formation.jpg|Veteran Corps of Artillery of the State of New York on New York Battery File:P3069432 (6249994461).jpg|Portuguese Colégio Militar students in dress uniform File:Kremlin regiment 1.jpg|Guards of the Russian Kremlin Regiment File:Álvaro Colom Caballeros, chega ao Palácio do Planalto para visita oficial ao Brasil.jpg|A guard of honour of the Brazilian Presidential Guard Battalion File:RC HUSARES DE JUNIN Nro 1.jpg|Officer of the Peruvian 1st Cavalry Regiment "Glorious Hussars of Junín" File:Marjorie Cole.jpg|Chelsea Pensioners, wearing their traditional Scarlet and Shako, at the Royal Hospital Chelsea. ==References== Category:19th-century fashion Category:20th-century fashion Category:Civil War military equipment of the United States Category:Hats Category:Headgear Category:History of clothing (Western fashion) Category:Hungarian words and phrases Category:Military uniforms 