Marhanets train accident

The Marhanets train accident occurred on 12 October 2010, at Marhanets, Dnipropetrovsk Oblast, Ukraine when a train collided with a passenger bus on a railroad level crossing. 43 people were reported dead and nine injured. The bus driver, whose actions allegedly caused the collision, was killed in the accident as well. The collision was the worst single road accident in Ukraine's history by number of victims. == Accident == left The collision between a midibus carrying around 48 passengers and a locomotive occurred at 08:30 a.m. local time (05:30 UTC) at an unmanned automated railway crossing. Of those who were killed, 38 died at the scene and the others in hospitals from their injuries. Ukrzaliznytsia's press service reported that a preliminary theory on the cause of the accident was the violation of traffic rules by the driver of the bus. == Reaction of the authorities == The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine planned to allocate 100,000 hryvnias (approx. 12,600 US dollars) to each family of those killed and injured in a collision. Officials said this was the deadliest vehicle accident in the country's history.Forty-three killed in bus, train crash President Viktor Yanukovych, on a visit to the region at the time, declared Wednesday the 13th a day of national mourning. Yanukovych also ordered for an investigation into the incident to be carried out in order to determine who bore responsibility for the crash and instructed transport officials to install automated crossing gates at all railway crossings to prevent cars, buses and trucks from ignoring signals. Road and railway accidents are common in Ukraine, where the roads are in poor condition, vehicles are poorly maintained, and drivers and passengers routinely disregard safety and traffic rules.40 killed in Ukraine train collision ==See also== *Scânteia train accident == References == Category:2010 in Ukraine Category:Railway accidents in 2010 Category:Level crossing incidents in Ukraine Category:2010 road incidents Category:Bus incidents in Ukraine Category:October 2010 events in Europe 