Gabriel Gbadamosi

Gabriel Gbadamosi (born 1961)Killam, G. Douglas, and Alicia L. Kerfoot, Student Encyclopedia of African Literature, Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 2008, p. 14. is a British poet, playwright and novelist of Irish- Nigerian descent. ==Biography== Gbadamosi was born in London, where he grew up in Vauxhall. He studied English at Cambridge University, earning a BA (Hons) degree.Susie Browning, "Playwright Gabriel Gbadamosi: ‘If some people are not free, then who is?’",The Stage, 7 January 2019. He held an AHRC Creative and Performing Arts Fellowship at Goldsmiths, University of London 2006–2009, based in the Department of Theatre and Performance and researching with the Pinter Centre for Performance and Creative Writing. He has also lectured in dramaturgy at the University of Istanbul,"Gabriel Gbadamosi", Foyles. has been Judith E. Wilson Fellow at the Faculty of English of Cambridge University, director of the Society of Authors, and a presenter of BBC Radio 3's arts programme Night Waves. His poems have featured in such anthologies as The New Poetry 1968–1988 (1988) and The Heinemann Book of African Poetry in English (1990), and his plays include No Blacks, No Irish, Eshu's Faust (Jesus College, Cambridge), Shango (DNA, Amsterdam), Hotel Orpheu (Schaubühne, Berlin), Friday's Daughter (for television), as well as the BBC Radio 3 drama about the Notting Hill Carnival entitled The Long, Hot Summer of '76, which won the first Richard Imison Memorial Award."Gabriel Gbadamosi", Saqi."Gabriel Gbadamosi – Non-fiction writer, Playwright, Poet", Royal Literary Fund. His recent play Stop and Search was staged at the Arcola Theatre in 2019, directed by Mehmet Ergen."Stop and Search", Arcola Theatre. His first published novel, Vauxhall (2013, Telegram Books, ), described by The Spectator's reviewer as "a book of rare poetic insight and humour that absorbs from start to finish", won the Tibor Jones Pageturner Prize and Best International Novel at the Sharjah Book Fair."World Literature: Prize Readings", The British Library, March 2019. In August 2013 he appeared on BBC Radio 4's Great Lives, nominating Nigerian musician Fela Kuti. ==References== Category:1961 births Category:Living people Category:Alumni of the University of Cambridge Category:British poets Category:British dramatists and playwrights Category:21st-century British novelists Category:English people of Nigerian descent Category:English people of Irish descent 