Petosegay

Petosegay or Pet-O-Sega (Ottawa: Rising Sun, Rays of the Morning Dawn and Sunbeams of Promise) (c. 1787 – June 15, 1885) was a 19th-century French- Ottawa Métis merchant and fur trader. Both present-day Petoskey, Michigan, Petoskey State Park, and nearby Emmet County park Camp Petosega are named in his honor. A particular variety of stone was found in abundance on his former lands and named after him, and the Petoskey stone was designated as the official state stone. ==Biography== ===Early life=== The son of Antoine Carre (Neaatooshing) and his wife, daughter of an Odawa chief, Petosegay was born along the northern banks of the Kalamazoo River near the mouth of Manistee. According to popular lore, his father held him up to the rising sun and said "his name shall be Petosegay and he shall become an important person".Royce, Julie. Traveling Michigan's Thumb. Indianapolis: Dog Ear Publishing, 2006. (pg. 211) He grew up in the lodge of his parents, roughly seven miles northwest of Harbor Springs, nearby the site of the town of Middle Village. At the age of 21, Petosegay married Kewaykabawikwa, the daughter of Pokozeegun, an Ottawa chieftain from the northern Lower Peninsula of Michigan. He and his new bride planted apple trees to celebrate their marriage. Many trees survived for decades and Petosegay's death, when they could still be seen by local residents. ===Experiences with the Jesuits=== With the arrival of Jesuit Catholic missionaries in the area during the early 19th century, Petosegay was befriended by the new men, who would have a great influence on him throughout his life. He was called Neyas Petosega by the Jesuits, who later interpreted Neyas as an abbreviation of Ignatius, the given name of Saint Ignatius Loyola. Eventually the young chief would become Catholic and adopt the Christian name Ignatius Petosega. During the 1840s, when the US government began establishing the first Indian schools for the purposes of educating Native American children, Petosegay sent his two oldest sons to Twinsburg Institute in Twinsburg, Ohio. It was also attended by Native Americans Andrew Jackson Blackbird and Simon Pokagon, who later became writers.Vogel, Virgil J. Indian Names in Michigan. Lansing: University of Michigan Press, 1986. (pg. 46) However, when the Jesuits learned that this school was operated by Protestants, they asked Petosegay to withdraw his sons, under threat of excommunication. Although he eventually agreed due in part to his wife, who recognized the power and influence held by the Jesuits among the Chippewa and Ottawa of Northern Michigan, many of whom had converted to Catholicism. Eventually Petosegay broke with the Jesuits. ===Founding of Petoskey and later years=== Moving his family to the southern shore of Little Traverse Bay, Petosegay and his elder sons soon acquired much of the land of what is now Petoskey, Michigan. He expanded trading to become a prominent merchant and landowner. In 1852, a Presbyterian Mission was established on the land of Nathan Jarman, a local farmer living west of Petoskey's village. Choosing to declare independence of the Jesuits, Petosegay became actively involved with the Presbyterians, and he and his children became regular attendees at the services. His grandson William Petoskey, the son of Francis, later became a Presbyterian minister. The Jesuits, who had lost some support from the local tribes south of the Bay, attempted to regain control although their attempt to establish a rival mission failed as a direct result of Petosegay's support of the Presbyterian church. His wife, upset at her husband's decision to leave their home of 43 years, left him to live with her relatives across the bay. He lived with another woman during this time, however, he agreed to take her back when she returned several years later. Petosegay gave the second woman a dower and she left the village.Grand Traverse Historical Society. The Traverse Region, Historical and Descriptive, with Illustrations of Scenery and Portraits of Biographical Sketches of some of its Prominent Men and Pioneers. Chicago: H.R. Page & Co., 1884. (pg. 153-154) In 1873, the local residents living along the bay of Bear Creek named their settlement Petoskey in his honor. Although the name was a corruption of Petosegay, he changed the spelling of his name as a gesture to them. After his wife died in 1881, he lived with his daughter and her husband Moses Waukazoo. Suffering poor health thereafter, he died on June 27, 1885. Of his ten children, his son Ignatius Petoskey was rumored to have been become the last chief and head of the Bear River Ottawa. This was a non-tribal viewpoint that tribal members found amusing because it was untrue.Royce, Julie. Traveling Michigan's Sunset Coast. Indianapolis: Dog Ear Publishing, 2007. (pg. 287) A type of fossil colonial coral, dating back to the Devonian period, was later discovered on his land and named after him as the Petoskey stone.Godfrey, Linda S. Weird Michigan: Your Travel Guide to Michigan's Local Legends and Best Kept Secrets. New York: Sterling Publishing Company, 2006. (pg. 27) This was later declared the official state stone by Governor George Romney, who officially signed a bill to that effect. A granddaughter, Ella Jane Petoskey, was present at the signing.Mueller, Bruce and William H. Wilde. The Complete Guide to Petoskey Stones. Lansing: University of Michigan Press, 2004. (pg. 8-9) In 2005 a bronze statue of Petosegay was erected in Petoskey on a prominent hill overlooking the town and Little Traverse Bay.http://www.detnews.com/2005/metro/0507/07/B08-239724.htm Detroit News, 0 May 005 ==Further reading== * Michigan History. Lansing: Michigan Historical Commission, 1917. * Wargin, Kathy-jo. Legend of the Petoskey Stone. Chelsea, Michigan: Sleeping Bear Press, 2004. ==References== Category:1787 births Category:1885 deaths Category:Odawa people Category:Native American leaders Category:People from Michigan 