List of college sports teams in the United States with different nicknames for men's and women's teams

The following is a list of college athletics programs in the United States that have different nicknames for their men's and women's teams. ==Different nicknames== * Arkansas at Monticello, University of (Arkansas–Monticello, UA–Monticello, or UAM). Men's teams: Arkansas–Monticello Boll Weevils. Women's teams: Arkansas–Monticello Cotton Blossoms. * Arkansas Tech University. Men's teams: Arkansas Tech Wonder Boys. Women's teams: Arkansas Tech Golden Suns * California Lutheran University. Men's teams: Cal Lutheran Kingsmen. Women's teams: Cal Lutheran Regals. * Centenary College of Louisiana. Men's teams: Centenary Gentlemen. Women's teams: Centenary Ladies. * Central Arkansas, University of. Men's teams: Central Arkansas Bears. Women's teams: Central Arkansas Sugar Bears. * Central Missouri, University of. Men's teams: Central Missouri Mules. Women's teams: Central Missouri Jennies. * Claremont McKenna College: See Claremont–Mudd–Scripps. * Claremont–Mudd–Scripps (the combined athletic program of three of the five undergraduate Claremont Colleges). Men's teams: Claremont–Mudd–Scripps Stags. Women's teams: Claremont–Mudd–Scripps Athenas. * Georgia, University of. Most of the teams are called the Georgia Bulldogs. The women's basketball team is called the Georgia Lady Bulldogs. The women's gymnastics team is called the Georgia Gym Dogs. * Harvey Mudd College: See Claremont–Mudd–Scripps. * Hawaiʻi (at Mānoa), University of. As of the 2013–14 school year, all men's teams are known as Hawaiʻi Rainbow Warriors. Women's teams are known as the Hawaiʻi Rainbow Wahine. In women's beach volleyball, the official nickname is still Rainbow Wahine, but the team has largely deprecated it in favor of SandBows. * Kentucky State University. Men's teams: Kentucky State Thorobreds. Women's teams: Kentucky State Thorobrettes. * Kenyon College. Men's teams: Kenyon Lords. Women's teams: Kenyon Ladies. * Louisiana Tech University. Men's teams: Louisiana Tech Bulldogs. Women's teams: Louisiana Tech Lady Techsters. * Massachusetts (at Amherst), University of. Men's teams: UMass Minutemen. Women's teams: UMass Minutewomen. * McNeese State University. Men's teams: McNeese State Cowboys. Women's teams: McNeese State Cowgirls. * Mississippi Valley State University. Men's teams: Mississippi Valley State Delta Devils. Women's teams: Mississippi Valley State Devilettes. * New Mexico Highlands University. Men's teams: New Mexico Highlands Cowboys. Women's teams: New Mexico Highlands Cowgirls. * Northland College (Wisconsin). Men's teams: Northland LumberJacks. Women's teams: Northland LumberJills. * Oklahoma State University. Men's teams: Oklahoma State Cowboys. Women's teams: Oklahoma State Cowgirls. * Saint Peter's University. Men's teams: Saint Peter's Peacocks. Women's teams: Saint Peter's Peahens * Scripps College: See Claremont–Mudd–Scripps. * St. Ambrose University. Men's teams: St. Ambrose Fighting Bees. Women's teams: St. Ambrose Queen Bees * Stephen F. Austin State University. Men's teams: Stephen F. Austin Lumberjacks. Women's teams: Stephen F. Austin Ladyjacks. (Compare to Northern Arizona University, which uses "Lumberjacks" for all teams regardless of sex.) * University of Southern California (USC) — Men's teams: Trojans. Women's teams: Trojans and Women of Troy are used interchangeably. * University of Utah — All teams use "Utes" except women's gymnastics, which instead uses Red Rocks. * Western Kentucky University (sometimes WKU) — Men's teams: WKU Hilltoppers. Women's teams: WKU Lady Toppers. * Wyoming, University of. Men's teams: Wyoming Cowboys. Women's teams: Wyoming Cowgirls. * Xavier University of Louisiana. Men's teams: Xavier Gold Rush. Women's teams: Xavier Gold Nuggets. ==Schools that use the prefix "Lady" for some or all of the women's teams== * Alabama A&M; University. Men's teams: Bulldogs. Women's teams: Lady Bulldogs. * Alabama State University. Men's teams: Hornets. Women's teams: Lady Hornets. * Alcorn State University. Men's teams: Braves. Women's teams: Lady Braves. * Baylor University. Men's teams are the Bears. Some women's teams are the Lady Bears, while some are Bears. * Campbell University. The women's basketball team is known as the Lady Camels. All other teams for both sexes are known as the Campbell Fighting Camels. * California State University, Northridge. Men's teams: Matadors. Women's teams: Lady Matadors. * Carthage College. Men's teams: Red Men. Women's teams: Lady Reds. * Delta State Men's teams: Statesmen. Women's teams: Lady Statesmen. * Eastern Kentucky University. The women's basketball team is known as the Lady Colonels. All other teams for both sexes are known as Colonels. * Emporia State University, Men's teams: Emporia State Hornets. Women's teams: Emporia State Lady Hornets. * Florida A&M; University. Men's teams: Rattlers. Women's teams: Lady Rattlers. * Hampton University. Men's teams: Pirates. Women's teams: Lady Pirates. * Howard University. Men's teams: Howard Bison. Women's teams: Howard Lady Bison. * Jackson State University. Men's teams: Jackson State Tigers. Women's teams: Jackson State Lady Tigers. * Lamar University. Men's teams: Lamar Cardinals. Women's teams: Lamar Lady Cardinals. * Liberty University. Men's teams: Liberty Flames. Women's teams: Liberty Lady Flames. * Lindenwood University. Men's teams: Lindenwood Lions. Women's teams: Lindenwood Lady Lions. * Louisiana State University. Men's teams: LSU Tigers. Women's teams: Either LSU Tigers or LSU Lady Tigers, depending on whether the specific sport is sponsored for both men and women. "Lady Tigers" is used in sports that have both men's and women's teams (basketball, cross country, golf, swimming & diving, tennis, and both indoor and outdoor track & field). Sports that have only a women's team (gymnastics, soccer, softball, and both indoor and beach volleyball) are "Tigers". * Manhattan College. Men's teams: Jaspers. Women's teams: Lady Jaspers. * Montana, University of. The women's basketball team is known as the Lady Griz. All other teams for both sexes are known as Grizzlies. * Missouri State University. Men's teams: Bears. Women's teams: Lady Bears. * Morgan State University. Men's teams: Bears. Women's teams: Lady Bears. * North Carolina Central University. Men's teams: Eagles. Women's teams: Lady Eagles. * Northwestern State University. Men's teams: Demons. Women's teams: Lady Demons. * Old Dominion University. Men's teams: Old Dominion Monarchs. Most women's teams are Old Dominion Lady Monarchs, except for field hockey (an NCAA-sanctioned sport only for women) and lacrosse (which ODU sponsors at varsity level for women but not men). Those two women's teams, as well as the coeducational team in the non-NCAA sport of sailing, use Monarchs. * Pennsylvania State University. The women's basketball team is known as the Penn State Lady Lions. All other teams for both sexes are known as Penn State Nittany Lions. * Prairie View A&M; University. Men's teams: Panthers. Women's teams: Lady Panthers * Savannah State University. Men's teams: Tigers. Women's teams: Lady Tigers * South Carolina State University. Men's teams: Bulldogs. Women's teams: Lady Bulldogs * Southeastern Louisiana University. Men's teams: Lions. Women's teams: Lady Lions * Southern University. Men's teams: Jaguars. Women's teams: Lady Jaguars * University of Southern Mississippi. Men's teams: Golden Eagles. Women's teams: Lady Eagles * Tennessee, University of: During the 2017–18 school year, the university once again allowed all women's teams to use the historic women's nickname of "Lady Volunteers", reversing a policy implemented in 2015 that saw only the women's basketball team retain "Lady Volunteers". Since then, the use of "Lady Volunteers" has moved toward a model similar to that of LSU, with women's teams in sports sponsored for both sexes using "Lady Volunteers" and those sponsored only for women using "Volunteers". * Tennessee State University. Men's teams: Tigers. Women's teams: Lady Tigers, except the women's track team, known as the Tigerbelles. * Texas A&M; University–Kingsville. Men's teams are the Javelinas. Some women's teams are the Lady Javelinas, and others are Javelinas. * Texas Southern University. Men's teams: Tigers. Women's teams: Lady Tigers * Texas Tech University. The women's basketball team is known as the Lady Raiders. All other teams for both sexes are known as Red Raiders. * Nevada, Las Vegas, University of (UNLV). The women's basketball team is known as the Lady Rebels. All other teams for both sexes are known as Rebels except for the men's basketball team, known as Runnin' Rebels. * Wilkes University. Men's teams: Wilkes Colonels. Women's teams: Wilkes Lady Colonels. * Yeshiva University. Men's teams: Yeshiva Maccabees. Women's teams: Yeshiva Lady Macs. ==Schools that once used different nicknames for women's teams, but no longer do== * Anderson University (Indiana): Historically, men's teams had been known as Ravens and women's teams as Lady Ravens, but the school has now dropped the "Lady" prefix. * Arkansas, University of. Women's teams were known as Lady Razorbacks or Lady'Backs, but the university now refers to them simply as the Razorbacks or Razorback women. * Austin Peay State University. Men's teams: Governors. Women's teams: Lady Govs. However the school has discontinued this distinction. * Buffalo. From the late-1970s until the mid-1990s, the women's teams were known as the Royals, while the men's teams were the Bulls. Now all teams are known as the Bulls. * Chattanooga, University of Tennessee at. Men's teams: Chattanooga Mocs. Women's teams: Chattanooga Lady Mocs. Chattanooga dropped the Lady prefix during the 2013-14 school year. * Colorado Boulder, University of (Colorado): When the school began sponsoring women's sports in the 1970s, those teams were known as "Lady Buffs". Since 1993, women's sports have used the men's nickname of Buffaloes. * Eastern New Mexico University. Men's teams: Eastern New Mexico Greyhounds. Women's teams: Eastern New Mexico Zias. ENMU dropped Zias before the 2015–16 academic year. * Johnson University: Men's teams were known as Preachers and women's teams as Lady Evangels before the 2013–14 school year, when all teams adopted Royals. * Kentucky, University of. Women's teams were known as Lady Kats, but adopted the men's nickname of Wildcats starting with the 1995–96 academic year. The women's gymnastics team retained its historic nickname of GymKats for several years before abandoning it in favor of Wildcats. * Lincoln Christian University. Once known as Preachers (men) and Angels (women); all teams are now Red Lions. * Louisiana at Lafayette, University of (Louisiana). The women's teams were referred to as the "Lady Cajuns" until the 2006–07 academic year, but they now use the same "Ragin' Cajuns" nickname as the men's teams. * Middle Tennessee State University. The women's teams were referred to as the Lady Raiders until the 2007-08 academic year, but they now use the same Blue Raiders nickname as the men's teams. * Mississippi State University. Men's teams: Mississippi State Bulldogs. Women's teams: Mississippi State Lady Bulldogs. Mississippi State dropped the Lady prefix in the fall of 2012. * New Mexico State University. Unlike most schools that had separate nicknames for the two sexes, New Mexico State did not have a distinctly feminine women's nickname. Before 2000, women's teams were known as Roadrunners. During the 1999–2000 school year, NMSU female athletes voted to adopt the men's nickname of Aggies, with the change taking effect in the next school year. * North Georgia College & State University: The first intercollegiate athletic teams were men's teams known as Cadets, from the school's history as a senior military college. When women's basketball was added as the school's first women's sport, that team was known as Golddiggers (referencing the school's location in the old gold-mining town of Dahlonega). In the 1970s, the men's and women's teams became Saints and Lady Saints. When NGCSU was merged into the current University of North Georgia in 2013, the merged school adopted the nickname of Nighthawks for all teams. * Oral Roberts University. When ORU began intercollegiate athletics in 1965, its teams were Titans; when women's sports were added, those teams became Lady Titans. Just before the end of the 1992–93 academic year, the school adopted its current nickname of Golden Eagles for all teams, with the change taking effect with the start of the new school year. * South Alabama, University of. Historically, men's teams were Jaguars and women's teams were Lady Jaguars. By the 2012–13 school year, all women's teams except for basketball had dropped the "Lady" prefix, and the women's basketball team followed suit in 2013–14. * Stony Brook University. From 1966 to 1994, men's and women's teams were respectively Patriots and Lady Patriots. Since 1994–95, all teams for both sexes use Seawolves. * Syracuse University. Before the 2004–05 academic year, men's and women's teams were Orangemen and Orangewomen. All teams for both sexes are now known as Orange. * Tarleton State University — In the late 1960s, the school adopted "TexAnns", a variation of the men's nickname of Texans, for women's teams when female athletes desired a distinctive nickname. TSU changed to "Texans" for all teams in 2019–20, following a campaign launched by two players and a student manager on the TSU women's basketball team. * Texas at El Paso, University of (UTEP). Historically, men's teams were Miners and women's teams were Lady Miners. Over time, women's teams began dropping the "Lady" prefix, and by 2014–15 all women's teams had done so. * Texas Christian University. Men's teams: TCU Horned Frogs. Women's teams: TCU Lady Frogs. TCU dropped the Lady Frogs in 2010. * Washburn University. Before the 2013–14 school year, men's teams were Ichabods and women's teams were Lady Blues. In May 2013, the school announced that women's teams would adopt the Ichabods nickname effective with the new school year. * Western Illinois University. Before the 2009–10 academic year, women's teams were known as the Westerwinds. They now use the men's nickname of Leathernecks. ==See also== *List of college nickname changes in the United States *List of college sports team nicknames *List of college team nicknames in the United States *List of college mascots in the United States *List of mascots ==References== Category:College sports teams in the United States Category:Women's sports teams in the United States Category:College sports culture in the United States Category:College sports in the United States lists United S College 