Horace B. Willard

Horace Birney Willard (May 2, 1825 – April 1, 1900) was an American politician, physician, and businessman from New York City. A recipient of a state scholarship, Willard attended Geneva Medical College then established a medical practice in Aztalan, Wisconsin. Forced out of the profession due to poor health, Willard became engaged in several business dealings in nearby Fort Atkinson. Willard was an early member of the state Republican Party and served a term in the Wisconsin State Assembly. ==Biography== Horace Birney Willard was born in Volney, New York on May 2, 1825. After studying in the public schools, Willard worked as a teacher. He studied medicine under William B. Coye in Gilbertsville, New York, then received a scholarship sponsored by the state. Willard attended the Geneva Medical College, graduating in 1849. He set out west, settling in Aztalan, Wisconsin, to practice medicine. After seven years, he sold his practice due to failing health. After a year of travel, Willard settled in Lake Mills, Wisconsin, in 1857, again practicing medicine. Poor health caused Willard to finally abandon medicine in 1866. Willard remained in the county, settling in Fort Atkinson. There, Willard engaged in several commercial pursuits. He co-founded the Northwestern Manufacturing Company and served as one of its first directors. Willard was also bookkeeper, secretary, and stockholder in the Foundry and Machining Company. In partnership with N. F. Hopkins and F. M. Vickery, Willard opened the Willard & Co. store. this house in Fort Atkinson. Present at its original state convention, Willard was an early member of the Republican Party in Wisconsin. He also helped to organize its chapter in Jefferson County. In 1860, Willard was nominated to the Wisconsin State Assembly. There, Willard advocated against sending state delegates to the Peace Conference of 1861. He was re-nominated for the next session, but declined to run. Willard instead took a position on the Jefferson County Board of Supervisors. Later in his life, Willard was known for his independent political stances, supporting Horace Greeley and Samuel J. Tilden for President. He ran for mayor of Fort Atkinson in 1878, but was defeated. He briefly lived in the former George P. Marston House. Willard married Elizabeth S. Vickery on July 11, 1849. They had one daughter, Julia Adola, who married the son of Congressman Lucien B. Caswell. Willard died on April 1, 1900, in Fort Atkinson. He was buried there in Evergreen Cemetery. ==References== Category:1825 births Category:1900 deaths Category:County supervisors in Wisconsin Category:Members of the Wisconsin State Assembly Category:People from Oswego County, New York Category:People from Aztalan, Wisconsin Category:Geneva Medical College alumni Category:Businesspeople from New York (state) Category:Businesspeople from Wisconsin Category:Physicians from New York (state) Category:Physicians from Wisconsin Category:Wisconsin Republicans Category:19th-century American politicians Category:People from Fort Atkinson, Wisconsin 