Jana Stump

Jana A. Shelfer (nee Stump; born 1975) is an American Paralympic wheelchair basketball player. She has won a bronze medal at the 1996 Summer Paralympics and a gold medal at the 2004 Summer Paralympics. ==Early life== Stump was born and raised in Belleville, Kansas to parents Jerry and Kathleen. In 1990, on the last day of her freshman year, she became paralyzed after a seat belt broke and threw her into the backseat. After returning to high school in a wheelchair, she was crowned Young Woman of the Year at 18 years old. ==Career== After graduating from Belleville High School, she accepted a basketball scholarship at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign. She was a member of Delta Gamma while majoring in Broadcast Journalism. During the 1995–96 season, she was named to the United States women's national wheelchair basketball team to compete at the 1996 Summer Paralympics. As the youngest player on the roster, she helped Team USA win a bronze medal. Upon her return, Stump was named to the NCAA First All–Tournament Team and awarded the Most Improved Player Award. She was also awarded the Pamela Borelli and Family Leadership Achievement Award. The next year, she received the Fourth Year Award before graduating. In 2004, she was named to the United States women's national wheelchair basketball team that won a gold medal at the 2004 Summer Paralympics. With her broadcasting degree, Stump moved to Orlando to work in media relations for Walt Disney World and at WMFE-FM. ==References== ==External links== *Paralympic profile Category:People from Belleville, Kansas Category:Sportspeople from Kansas Category:Sportspeople from Tacoma, Washington Category:1975 births Category:Living people Category:American women's wheelchair basketball players Category:Paralympic gold medalists for the United States Category:Paralympic bronze medalists for the United States Category:Medalists at the 1996 Summer Paralympics Category:Medalists at the 2004 Summer Paralympics Category:American disabled sportspeople Category:University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign alumni Category:Paralympic medalists in wheelchair basketball Category:Wheelchair basketball players at the 1996 Summer Paralympics Category:Wheelchair basketball players at the 2004 Summer Paralympics Category:Paralympic wheelchair basketball players of the United States 