Sanrio Puroland

, also known as Hello Kitty Land, is an indoor theme park located in Tama New Town, Tokyo, Japan that attracts over 1.5 million visitors per year. Opened on December 7, 1990, the theme park is run by the Sanrio company, and hosts various musicals, restaurants, attractions, and theme rides using popular characters such as Hello Kitty, My Melody, Cinnamoroll, Jewelpet, and many more. While many attractions are only in Japanese, Puroland attracts international visitors because of the worldwide popularity of these characters. Puroland also has an extensive gift shop selling Sanrio character merchandise. Tourists visiting during the summer will be able to see a daily fireworks show. It includes a boat ride similar to Disneyland's It's a Small World in which Cinnamorroll leads riders to a party being held by Hello Kitty, passing through the homes of several Sanrio characters, including Keroppi's pond and Badtz Maru's cave. Visitors can also tour Kitty's house, which includes Renaissance-style portraits of her family, fancy furniture and a bath-tub shaped like her face, and displays of her purses and jewelry. Her computer and television are also in her head shape. There are three live theaters and one film theater. It also includes attraction areas themed to candy, ice cream, bread, juice, and chocolate factories. The theme park lost money during its first three years, owing to operational foul-ups and a temporary lull in Hello Kitty's popularity. Despite these setbacks, the park has become one of Japan's most popular attractions along with Tokyo Disneyland and Tokyo DisneySea."Cute Inc." wired.com Nearby train stations are the Odakyu Tama Center Station (Odakyu Tama Line), Keio Tama Center Station on the Keio Sagamihara Line, and Tama City Monorail's Tama Center Station. On February 21, 2020, the Hello Kitty Land theme in Tokyo closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Park officials had hoped to have it reopened in early April 2020, but later had pushed back reopening to July 20, 2020.https://en.puroland.jp/special/release_lang/pdf/y2020/20200221_SET_Temporary%20Closure_EN_FNL.pdf ==References== ==External links== * Official website Category:1990 establishments in Japan Category:Indoor amusement parks Category:Tourist attractions in Tokyo Category:Amusement parks in Japan Category:Western Tokyo Category:Buildings and structures in Tokyo Category:Sanrio Category:Tama, Tokyo Category:Amusement parks opened in 1990 