Gerald Page-Hanify

Gerald Page-Hanify (23 July 1860 – 11 February 1922) was a member of the Queensland Legislative Council. ==Early life== Executive Bible in State Schools League Queensland, Gerald Hanify-Page is second from the left in the back row Page-Hanify was born at Ararat, Victoria, to Michael John Page-Hanify and his wife Annie Mary Josepha (née Lane). He was educated in Ararat and worked as an accountant. He was a member of the International Order of Good Templars, serving as its Grand Chief from 1908 to 1916. He was also president of the Total Abstinence Society, chairman of the Six O'Clock Closing League, and chairman of the Queensland Termperance Alliance. ==Political career== When the Labour Party starting forming governments in Queensland, it found much of its legislation being blocked by a hostile Council, where members had been appointed for life by successive conservative governments. After a failed referendum in May 1917, Premier Ryan tried a new tactic, and later that year advised the Governor, Sir Hamilton John Goold-Adams, to appoint thirteen new members whose allegiance lay with Labour to the Council."Goold-Adams, Sir Hamilton John (1858–1920)" Australian Dictionary of Biography. Retrieved 12 April 2015. Page-Hanify was one of the thirteen new members, and went on to serve for four and a half years until his death in February 1922, just one month before the Council was abolished. ==Personal life== Page-Hanify married Katherine (Kittie) Salisbury at All Saints Anglican Church, Brisbane in 1886 and together had two sons, Cecil and Gerald Herbert. In February 1922, Gerald Page-Hanify travelled to Miles as part of his masonic duties, a trip that he had delayed for some weeks due to ill-health. He had not sought medical assistance as he did not believe his illness was serious. However, having arrived in Miles, he was admitted to the local hospital where he died of heart failure. His funeral proceeded from his Norman Park, Brisbane, residence to the Bulimba Cemetery.Page-Hanify Gerald – Brisbane City Council Grave Location Search. Retrieved 12 April 2015. His son Cecil Page-Hanify was the Registrar of the University of Queensland from 1935 to 1957. ==References== Category:Members of the Queensland Legislative Council Category:1860 births Category:1922 deaths Category:Australian Labor Party members of the Parliament of Queensland Category:Burials in Balmoral Cemetery, Brisbane Category:People from Ararat, Victoria 